hey this is presto Walker find the sum
of the following series 1 over the
quantity 1 times 2 plus 1 over the
quantity 2 times 3 plus 1 over the
quantity 3 times 4 plus etc going on to
infinity this problem was asked as part
of the Cambridge exam for students
seeking a Bachelor of Arts in 1802 can
you figure it out give this problem a
try and when you're ready keep watching
the video for the solution to solve this
infinite series we're going to consider
a specific term of the series which has
the form 1 over the quantity n times n
plus 1 one way that we can simplify this
term is that we can decompose it into
simple fractions we can do this using
the method of partial fractions
specifically we want to make this term
equal to the sum of two fractions it'll
be some fraction a over N plus another
fraction
B over n plus 1 and it'll be easier to
evaluate this infinite series if we look
at fractions which only have one term in
the denominator so to solve this
equation we're going to multiply both
sides by n times n plus 1 we end up with
the equation that 1 is equal to a times
the quantity n plus 1 plus B times n now
we expand the right hand side in group
like terms we can see from this equation
that we need the constant term of a to
be equal to 1 and we need the
coefficient of n which is a plus B to be
equal to 0 so we have a system of
equations where a is equal to 1 and a
plus B is equal to 0 we can solve this
very easily that a is equal to 1 and B
is equal to negative 1 so we figured out
how to decompose our general term into
simple fractions as follows we have that
1 over the quantity n times n plus 1 is
equal
to one over n minus one over n plus one
so how's this gonna help us solve our
infinite series well let's take a look
at the sum of our series up to K terms
from this partial sum let's take a look
at just the very first term of this song
we have 1 over the quantity 1 times 2
well let's apply our formula to
decompose this into two simple fractions
so the very first term will be equal to
1 over 1 minus 1 over 2 we can now apply
the formula to the second term this will
be equal to 1 over 2 minus 1 over 3 and
we apply it to the third term we're
going to have 1 over 3 minus 1 over 4
now we can continue applying this
formula to the rest of the terms in this
series so now we can see a very magical
cancellation happens here we have
negative 1/2 and then positive 1/2
those terms will cancel out we then have
negative 1/3 and a positive 1/3 those
terms will cancel out this pattern
continues we have negative 1/4 and plus
1/4 and that'll also continue and we go
all the way where all of these middle
terms keep canceling out now if you
consider a retracting telescope the
pattern that we have in the series is
very familiar to the shape of our
attracting telescope we can expand it
out all the way but we can also contract
it where we only have the very beginning
and the very end surviving so just like
that our series is like an expanded
telescope and now we've cancelled out
all these terms in the middle and we've
retracted it back to the smaller form
for this reason this type of series is
known as a telescoping series so we now
have very simple form of the sum up to
the K terms of this infinite series we
then calculate the sum of the infinite
series by
letting K go to infinity now 1 over K
plus 1 will go to zero and therefore our
infinite series will have the sum that's
exactly equal to 1 so that's the answer
to this problem now I know some of you
might say this is a little bit too easy
but this exam was actually pretty hard
for anyone who thinks this problem was
too easy
you're welcome to try the very next
question on the exam if half of the
earth were taken off by the impulse of a
comet what change would be produced in
the moon's orbit I don't know the answer
and I could not quickly figure out the
answer from doing a few internet
searches so if you know the answer to
this question please share your
knowledge in the comments did you figure
out the original problem thanks for
watching this video please subscribe to
my channel I make videos on math you can
catch around my blog mind your decisions
that you can follow on Facebook Google+
and patreon you can catch it on social
media at Prashar kerr and if you liked
this video please check out my books
there are links in the video description